.. post:: 2023-4-08
   :category: random

===================
Settling in Finland
===================

Introduction
============
I just moved from Germany to Finland at the end of 03/2023 and I want to note down a few
things that I did to settle in Finland (Helsinki specifically). Since I have a sister
living in Helsinki already, accommodation was not a problem for me. Hence, I have
nothing interesting to say about accommodation. I will talk mostly about the process of
registering myself to the Finnish system and setting up all the essentials.

Registering in the DVV
======================
The first thing I had to when I arrived in Finland is registering myself to DVV (Digital
and Population Data Services Agency) to get my "Personal Identity Code". I was being
careless about this and did not book an appointment before flying to Helsinki so I had
to wait a week for it. Therefore, book your appointment beforehand if you can so you
don't have to wait. I went to the DVV building around 13:00, my appointment was at
13:30. I still had to take a number and waited til around 13:35, after that the whole
process took around 2 minutes and I left the building around 13:40. Since I come to
Finland working as a specialist, I got my identity code after 2 days. After getting my
identity code, I immediately started the process of opening a bank account, getting my
Finnish ID, and getting a SIM contract.

Bank Account
============
Looking around on `r/Finland <https://www.reddit.com/r/Finland/>`_, it seemed like
Nordea is a bank which is english speakers friendly so I went with it. I called them two
times. The first time was near lunchtime , no one was picking up after 20 minutes and I
had a meeting to attend so I had to hang up. The second time I called was after lunch,
around 13:30, someone picked up after around 10 minutes. I managed to book an
appointment in 2 weeks. They did ask me if I have a Finnish ID, which I didn't have at
the time, but they also accept passport so that wasn't a problem.

Mobile contract
===============
I went to Elisa (no pacticular reason, they were the roaming service provider for my
german network, and it worked fine so I just went with it), and was planning to have a
mobile contract but they required the Finnish ID, so I had to go home and wait for the
Finnish ID to be done.

Finnish ID
==========
It's my first time settling in Finland, I can't do this process online, since
`Poliisi <https://poliisi.fi/en/frontpage>`_ requires having either a bank account, a
Finnish ID (comically painful), or Mobile to use their online service. It didn't matter
anyway since I asked my sister for help and the earliest appointment available was in 3
months. I decided to go to the police station directly on the next day. Before going to
the police station, I had to have a passport photo to submit to them. I had one taken at
Passikuva Suomi, it was done in 5 minutes and it costed 19.90e. I went to the police
station early in the morning, around 7:50, and there was already a long line. I came in
to take a number and got number 11. It took around 50 minutes until my turn. The clerk
told me my Finnish ID would be ready in 8 working days, and when I receive the
notification about my ID, I could come to collect it at 1 of the last 3 booths without
having to take a number.

Mobile contract - Take Two
==========================
